---
title: Exploring EIP-1559 and how to optimize gas fees
excerpt: 'Whenever I send a transaction it always pussles me why the gas estimation is so bad. In most cases I want to send a transaction
that is as cheap as possible, but the gas estimation is always way too high.'
date: '2022-12-30'
---

<script lang="ts">
  import PriorityFee from "$lib/components/visualize/PriorityFee.svelte";
  import PendingTransactions from "$lib/components/visualize/PendingTransactions.svelte";
  export let data;
</script>

Whenever I send a transaction it always pussles me why the gas estimation is so bad. In most cases I want to send a transaction
that is as cheap as possible, but the gas estimation is always way too high. I can get it down to a more reasonable number by
manually tuning the priority fees. There are tools like [Blocknative Gas Fee Predictor](https://www.blocknative.com/gas-estimator)
that can help you find a descent gas price, it's still a bit of a guessing game.

### Method

In this article we will look at how to answer the questions:

1. What does `gas` distribution look like?
2. How long does it take for a transaction to get included in a block?
3. What is the lowest amount of gas needed to send a transaction within `X` minutes?
4. Given `gas`, `max_fee_per_gas` and `max_priority_fee_per_gas`, how long will it take for a transaction to get included in a block?

Spoiler alert: I have not found a good answer to any of these questions. However, I have found some interesting insights that
might be useful.

Transactions in a block are not distributed according to standard distributions. This makes all the other questions hard to answer.
And we will have to roll up our sleeves and do some statistics to get some answers. But more on that later.

## Background

If you are not familiar with EIP-1559 transactions I recommend you read [this article](https://www.blocknative.com/blog/eip-1559-fees).
What you need to know is:

- `gas` is the amount of computational work that needs to be done to execute a transaction. It's determined by how many EVM
  [`opcodes`](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/opcodes/) are executed.
- `base_fee` is the lowest gas price that is accepted by the network. If you set the gas price lower than the base fee your
  transaction will be rejected. The base fee is calculated by the network and is adjusted every block. The `base_fee` is burned.
- `priority_fee` is the amount of ether you are willing to pay on top of the base fee. The higher the priority fee the higher
  the priority of your transaction. Transactions with a higher priority will be included in a block sooner. The `priority_fee`
  goes to the validator.
- `max_fee_per_gas` is the maximum amount of ether you are willing to pay for a unit of gas. This is the total amount of ether
  you are willing to pay for the transaction. If its to low your transaction is not valid for inclusion in any block.
- `max_priority_fee_per_gas` is the amount of ether you are willing to pay for a unit of gas on top of the base fee. If its to
  low no validator will include your transaction in a block.

`max_fee_per_gas` and `max_priority_fee_per_gas` are the parameters you can tune to get the gas price you want. We can se how they
work by reading the [EIP-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md):

```python
priority_fee_per_gas = min(
  transaction.max_priority_fee_per_gas,
  transaction.max_fee_per_gas - block.base_fee_per_gas)
effective_gas_price = priority_fee_per_gas + block.base_fee_per_gas
```

## Experiment 1: What does `gas` distribution look like?

We can use box plots to visualize the distribution of `priority_fee` 5 blocks. The spread of the box is huge,
with a lot of outliers in most blocks. It is clear that the data is not normally distributed. We can use log scaling to
make the data easier to visualize.

<PriorityFee/>

At first glance it looks like the data is log-normal distributed. However running some statistical tests on the data
which can be seen [here](). This means that we will have to develop our own statistical model for how transactions are
distributed in a block.

## Experiment 2: How long does it take for a transaction to get included in a block?

We can store transactions that get into the mempool and monitor them to see how long they stay there before the get included
in a block. We can then use this data to see which transactions get included, which does not and which takes the longest time
before they get included.

<PendingTransactions {data} minSize=1 maxSize=20 />

What these shows are that transactions either get included quickly or they need to wait for the right network conditions and even
with the right conditions they might not get included at all. This is very useful for us. Given enough transactions
we can build a lookup table that tells us the probability of a transaction getting included in a block. Simply each percentile
will get a probability of being included in a block. But before we can do this we need to gather a lot more pending transactions.

... to be continued
